Thank you very much and
welcome to session 500,
Wireless Directions.
It's truly amazing how much wireless
has permeated our lives since
we introduced AirPort in 1999.
In today's session,
we're going to hear from product
marketing going over the current state
of the union of where wireless is.
We're then going to look at several
updates that have happened recently
with AirPort 3.1 and move into futures
that we'll be integrating with Panther.
So with that,
I would like to introduce Lars Rehder,
who is the product marketing manager
for wireless technologies at Apple.
Thanks for coming today to the
Wireless Directions session.
Hope everyone's having a good show.
I think it was pretty amazing to be
able to get one of those cameras.
I wish I could have one.
A little envious.
I'm a big chatter, and I want to get on
the video chat thing.
About three months or so ago,
I was asked to put some slides together
to sort of capture what's happened over
the course of the last year in wireless
and extract from that some of the trends
or some key bits of information to pass
along to you as developers that you might
be able to use in your active wireless
solutions that you're working on today.
Or if you're sitting on the fence
wondering whether or not you need to
make the investment in wireless or want
to make the investment in wireless,
sort of a gentle nudge in the direction
of getting started with your solutions.
The flow of the presentation
today is really to start talking
about 802.11 at a grander level,
if you will, or more broadly.
Then, with the help of two of our
studly wireless engineers,
Phil Kearney and Paul Rekieta,
we'll talk about some of the
updates to AirPort Extreme.
Then, I'll come back in and
talk about Bluetooth.
Then, at the very end,
I'll actually begin a
discussion or a dialogue about
where we could take wireless,
how we can get it to the next level,
and some of the opportunities
that lie within that.
Then, time permitting,
we'll have some questions
and answers at the end.
Flickr doesn't want to work.
Before we actually get into 802.11,
I want to talk a little
bit about the matrix,
the wired wireless matrix.
This is a slide that we actually put up
last year at the Developers Conference to
sort of really assist in clearly
positioning the wireless technologies
against their wired counterparts.
And in the context of
the time it was done,
it was actually a very useful
and important slide in that there
was a lot of sort of confusion,
particularly around
Bluetooth at the time.
So with this simple slide,
we've actually done a lot for the
industry to really focus folks
into the right general areas.
This is also something that's
permeated not beyond Apple.
There's folks,
other major players in the industry
that have adopted similar positioning,
as well as organizations.
Like the Bluetooth SIG or
the Special Interest Group,
which I'll come back to and
talk about a little bit later.
The message here is
actually fairly simple,
but it's extremely powerful.
And here, really, as a developer,
what we suggest or recommend is
if you're working on a solution
that requires a lot of networking
or requires the transmission of
large amounts of data over the air,
we really suggest that you
gravitate towards 802.11.
If, however,
you're thinking about more peripherally
oriented solutions to a computer or are
not sending as much data over the air,
and that data tends to
be very bursty in nature,
then Bluetooth is probably more
appropriate for you to use.
So let's jump into 802.11,
beginning with AirPorT Extreme.
AirPorT Extreme is the
third-generation AirPorT product
that we introduced this year,
just January, at this very same facility,
the Macworld San Francisco.
And wandering around here today,
I've actually noticed quite a number
of folks who have actually picked up
an AirPorT Extreme-enabled system,
which is really exciting to see.
And whether you know it or not,
you're part of a very special statistic,
which I'll come back to in a few minutes.
And having had actually
those units there,
I'm sure you've actually firsthand sort
of felt the power and the flexibility
of the AirPorT Extreme product.
But I'm not sure if you're aware or not,
the actual design,
the roots of the design
for AirPorT Extreme go
all the way back to 1999,
when we built our first AirPorT product.
At the time, the design goals for that...
The design goals for that product
were essentially to make it fast,
affordable, and easy to use.
That was the mantra for the
original AirPorT product,
and packaging that all together was a
very successful wireless launch for us.
As last year,
as we were looking at AirPorT Extreme,
and coming up with our design
goals for this product,
we kept those three things at heart.
Those were still part of the
core aspects for AirPorT Extreme.
But we didn't stop there.
We actually went further.
We've talked to a lot of customers,
whether they're consumers
or institutions,
and captured from them their
desires and their concerns as well.
So we added in two more elements
to the design of the product.
One is compatibility.
This was a big message.
Folks are telling us,
"No matter where you go with wireless,
how you're taking it forward,
make sure you don't leave us behind,
who invested with you back in 1999,
when the first
AirPorT products came out."
So compatibility is an important
piece to the AirPort Extreme solution.
The other is flexibility.
We heard time and time again from
various folks different stories.
Some that say, you know,
my Extreme network is great,
but I can't quite reach out to the far
room in a house or across the pathway,
if you will,
to another building on a college campus.
Or we've heard folks talking about,
you know, I've got a lot of base stations
that are up and running.
I want to be able to dial back some of
that power to prevent channel overlap.
We did that.
We provided those
features in there as well.
We also heard from folks that said,
really, you know,
it would be nice if we could
share some more resources that
were available then to all the
clients that were on the network.
So we provided USB printing as well.
One of the biggest changes
actually that we made to this
product was under the hood,
and the transition from
802.11b to 802.11g.
Now if you remember,
or if you do a Google and go
back to about a year ago today,
and look at some of the
articles that were written,
it wasn't at all clear that folks
believed that 802.11g would even
come close to being finished.
And at the beginning of this year,
as we were shipping
the first products out,
there were folks that were writing,
saying, oh, you know, wait.
Don't jump in just yet.
You don't know if your manufacturer
of your product is going to leave
you behind and actually get you
up to the final specification.
Well, as we know,
in the last week and a half,
802.11g is now a standard.
And we've also introduced,
a week after that, last Thursday,
an AirPort 3.1 update that brings
all of our users up to 802.11g
compliancy in a free download.
So for those of you not as
familiar with the A0211G,
we really see this as our next
generation high speed wireless protocol.
It's what's going to take
us to the next level.
What it provides is 54
megabits per second speed,
so data rates up to 54
megabits per second,
which is nearly five times faster
than the older AirPorT products.
And this is actually kind of interesting.
This may be something of key
use for you as developers,
because now we're talking about
bandwidth and data rates that will
support more intensive media types.
And there's some interesting
solutions that could come out of that.
Air2.11g, by its nature,
is also compatible with B.
It runs in the same frequency band,
so it's available for use
in all the same countries.
It's essentially platform agnostic.
It'll work on a Mac, on a PC,
or even on a handheld.
So I want to talk a little bit
about momentum in the 802.11 space.
I think this is sort of a key
trend that's happened over
the course of the last year,
starting with--
the business.
If we look here at this chart,
we see essentially from 2001 to 2002
roughly an 18% growth in the revenue
generated from 802.11 products.
This is actually quite
phenomenal if you think about it.
This would have happened in
a time when the technology
industry is sort of on a slump,
if you will.
And actually some aspects of wireless
as well were struggling a little bit.
But here, wireless land,
802.11 was actually on the rise.
Last year,
11.6 million 802.11b clients were
actually shipped out into the market.
This year, it's looking even better.
So far, the first quarter,
so through the end of March this year,
nearly 5 million products have been sold.
And if that trend continues,
we're talking about 20
million products out there,
which is nearly doubling
what we had last year.
The one thing you'll note actually
on the chart is how fast and
how impactful the introduction
of 802.11g was on the market.
In the course of three months,
17% of the units that were
out there were 802.11g units.
This is before the product was even
sort of at IEEE standard levels,
if you will.
It's actually very phenomenal
to see an uptake that quickly
in a new wireless protocol.
We were very bullish on 802.11g,
and we expect that to continue,
although 802.11b is also
sort of the mainstay,
the workhorse of the 802.11 space.
So they'll tend to coexist probably
for the next couple of years before
802.11g sort of becomes more dominant.
So the other area of momentum
I wanted to talk about was just
product momentum in general.
Historically,
802.11 has been something that has really
been driven by the computing space,
whether it's a notebook or,
in the case of our products, desktops.
That will probably continue to
be the case for quite a while.
But one of the things we've seen
over the course of the last year
or so is new product categories
coming online with 802.11.
Whether they're handhelds or
Wi-Fi phones or appliances that are
as simple as allowing photographs
to be sort of generated over a sort
of picture frame type of a product
or having wireless projectors.
So as developers,
you may think to yourselves, well,
you know,
the computer space is kind of tight.
There's not a lot from a
hardware perspective I can do.
There is a lot of opportunity now
to expand 802.11 into new spaces
and actually get development efforts
going in different environments,
different product categories
than we've ever done before.
Let's talk a little bit about
the Macintosh user adoption.
We've sold over 2 million AirPort
products since the inception in 1999.
And in the first quarter of this year,
it was 150,000.
And as we heard in the
keynote this morning,
it's actually 300,000 as of today,
which is pretty phenomenal numbers.
In fact,
our AirPort business is white hot.
It's never been better.
We're nearly doubling
our business every year.
There's a lot of momentum generated
in people adopting wireless and
going wireless with their products.
This is another one of those slides
that's actually very interesting.
This is that special statistic
I was talking about earlier.
If you take a look at all
the 802.11b products sold,
the 11.6 million that I had
in the previous slide,
we'll find that 10% of those
products sold were to Mac users.
And 802.11g side,
18%. This is pretty phenomenal.
This is actually very significant.
If you think about that
from a computer perspective,
our users make up the top
5% of the computing market.
We're talking about 10%
and 18% adoption rate here.
So you're really seeing a user
group that is very pro wireless,
willing to invest in wireless,
willing to try out new solutions and
actually get going in the wireless track.
So hopefully,
this is something for you to take
away and really consider as you're
working on your business plans for your
solutions to really consider Mac first,
because it's the right user
group to really get you going.
And then if you need to,
move on to another platform.
So the other thing I want to talk about
is locations with respect to 802.11.
Up to the end of last year,
maybe just before that,
when we talk about wireless locations,
it's always been sort of
those traditional buckets.
It's the home.
I can browse the internet from my couch.
Or I can have multiple systems
in the home share a single
connection to the internet.
In education,
I unwire a whole classroom and I allow
kids to really be able to work where
they feel most comfortable and still
be able to connect to the resources,
whether they're on a campus
network or on the internet.
And from a business perspective,
it was about sort of extending
the wired connection wirelessly to
parts of their office environments.
That's sort of been the
traditional view of locations.
And something strange has happened,
something wonderful has happened
actually in the course of the last,
say, six to eight months.
We're seeing more locations
coming online than ever before and
interesting in different places.
We have cities.
In this case, the example is Paris.
This is an effort underway by the city
government in Paris to Wi-Fi enable,
ideally, I think the goal at the
end is the entire city,
but starting with the metro lines.
So as you're coming in
to work or going home,
you'll be able to get online.
Aircraft.
The traditional, you know,
verboten as far as any kind of
wireless technology is concerned
is now opening up to 802.11.
Lufthansa has announced that
they will be putting 802.11b
access into their 747 aircraft,
so as I'm cruising over
the Atlantic or Pacific,
whatever it might be,
I can actually get wireless connectivity
for $30 and be able to be productive
throughout the entire flight.
We see in New York,
Verizon is unwiring their
payphones and providing hotspots
for users throughout the city.
So if you're on your way
to work in the morning,
if you happen to stop at the donut shop,
you probably can get online
if there's a payphone nearby.
Same goes for coffee shops and bookstores
through operators like T-Mobile,
which currently have about 2,300
hotspots lit up in the U.S.,
where you can actually get on
and be able to communicate,
be connected.
So all these different pieces,
and kind of, well, where's it all going?
What's going to happen
with all this 802.11 stuff?
Well, firstly,
let's review the 802.11 technologies.
So we have 802.11b,
which I mentioned before,
is really the workhorse for 802.11.
[Transcript missing]
Technology of choice,
or the standard of choice, if you will,
for these public area hotspots,
since it ensures the broadest
range of compatibility.
AirTuttle 11G,
fastest performing wireless,
out the gates, fastest adopting wireless
technology that's out there.
There's really a lot of
excitement around this.
The numbers are looking really good.
People are actually
adopting it very quickly,
and we expect it to be the next
generation of wireless technology
that will proliferate out.
And finally, we have Air 2.11a, which,
you know,
I was thinking about this last night.
How do you kind of explain this without,
you know, you can't really sugarcoat it.
It hasn't moved much.
In fact, analysts have told us that last
year a grand total of 100,000
802.11a products were sold.
So there's really not been
a lot of growth there.
And I think they really missed
the compatibility message,
and that's really hurt them in that camp.
So there's really not a
lot of movement there.
So what are the takeaways from AIDA 2011?
First off, business is good.
Money is there to be made in this space.
It's clearly the case that
there's an upward trend while
the market is going down.
There are new product
categories coming online.
So again, if you're not particularly
interested in joining in on
the computing side of things,
there are opportunities to create
and work on solutions that sort
of peripherally work around the
computing environment that would
take advantage of this technology.
Thank you.
There are more places to
connect than ever before.
So now you can actually work
on a solution and kind of be
assured that more often than not,
when you go out throughout your day,
your users go throughout their
day and wherever they sort of
stop and pause for a moment,
they will be able to get online.
There's lots and lots of momentum,
so I would definitely encourage you
to really think strongly and go forth
into developing 802.11 solutions.
So from here, I'm actually going to
hand it over to Paul.
He's going to talk a little
bit about the actual updates
we did to AirPort last week.
Thank you, Lars.
Thank you for that studly introduction.
I'll try to live up to
the reputation there.
I want to talk a little bit about
the software update that we've
done and what we have planned for
coming up into Panther and beyond.
As Lars mentioned,
it was a year and a month ago
last year when we first started
talking about 802.11g and we
delivered that to you in January.
We did a software update in the
spring and did a pretty significant
software update just last week.
And is everybody in here
who is running wireless,
have you updated to 3.1 yet?
Not had any troubles?
I hope so.
So good,
that really helps the show network,
and we'll talk a little bit about
some of that as we go through.
So I mentioned the 3.1 update.
The goals there were, first of all,
compliance with the IEEE spec,
but once we get into the software,
we can't just leave one thing going,
so we have to work on multiple
things all at the same time.
And so we kind of took the top half
dozen or so things that we heard back
from customers and feedback that we
got to try to address some of those.
So with the draft specification that
we released that we had in January,
there were some issues with
performance and robustness,
so we addressed those.
AirPort Extreme introduced
this concept of a WDS,
which is the ability to extend
your wireless network wirelessly,
so people were asking for that.
In large homes,
or especially in schools where you want
to go from a main campus to a remote
classroom without having to run a wire
across a parking lot or a baseball field,
WDS is ideal for that solution.
But the first implementation was
somewhat complicated to set up
and generated a lot of questions,
so we tried to address that.
The other thing that comes a
lot... from developers especially,
are requests for SNMP support,
so SNMP to get information
about the network,
get statistics about the network.
So we incorporated some of
that in the firmware update,
and one thing that would come up
every now and then that we felt
like would be a good thing to
do is UTF-8 character support.
So that's really helpful for
our non-US friends who want
to publish network names,
publish names of base stations
using their native language.
And so... We allow you to do that
now and I'll show you some slides
about that as we go through.
First was performance.
So one of the advantages of
delivering a draft standard,
if you will,
is it allows us to get the product
out into a real world situation
and see how it's really used,
how it's used beyond just the theoretical
specifications that engineers like to
talk about when they're in closed rooms.
So we saw a lot of usage
patterns and scenarios
We addressed some of that.
Early on, there were a couple of common
myths that we wanted to dispel.
One was that a single 802.11b
client would drag the entire
network down to 802.11b speeds.
We obviously didn't want that to happen.
The other thing that people would
say is that a base station next door,
a base station down the hall,
who's an 802.11b base station would,
again, negatively impact the performance
of your G base station.
We didn't want to do that either.
A couple of technologies that our card
firmware vendor delivered to us is
directly directed at improving that
performance in this environment where
you have mixed B and G clients and
networks and lots of other interference.
One is a technology
called frame bursting.
Every vendor will call it something else.
Some might call it Nitro
this or Turbo that.
It's just really the ability to
take that amount of time that
you have able to send data.
In the case of ADF11G,
since you're sending
it five times as fast,
you might as well just send
more packets during that time.
That's kind of what frame bursting is and
the other RTS/CTS protection mechanisms.
I always wonder what the translators
are going to do with that.
But basically, that's again,
so you have a G-Bay station
in your house,
your neighbor has a B-Bay station,
and you don't know,
you don't know who your neighbor is,
you suspect it's Linksys because his
network is called Default or whatever.
But if you both happen to
be on the same channel,
you're going to be interfering and you
don't want to go over to your neighbor.
But you probably could,
you could probably just connect
to your neighbor's bay station
and type in "admin admin" and
I'm going to reconfigure it for him,
for his protection.
But this protection mechanism is really
just a way for the two base stations to
cooperate and better share the bandwidth.
So when our G-base station
wants to send some data,
they'll say, wait a minute,
I'm going to send some data.
The V-base station says, okay,
go ahead and send it.
And then when it's done,
things go back to normal.
The other is improving the
robustness of the connections.
So again, when NATO 211 first came out,
it was highly controlled,
and it would be in
these enterprise shops,
and everybody would coordinate
what channels are being used,
and you wouldn't really have
problems with interference.
But now that we're selling
into more and more homes and
classrooms and small offices,
well, there's not any kind of integrated,
coordinated effort.
There's just no way to know what
the base station next to you,
what channel number they're on,
what other kind of
parameters they're using.
So we added the ability to
look for the best channel.
So when the base station starts up,
it's going to look around,
scan the network, and say, oh,
I'll operate today on channel four.
So that's just one of the improvements
to simplify your connections.
The other is kind of a more low level
thing that happens in the card firmware.
So as you know in this 2.4 GHz space,
it's unlicensed, so there's a lot of
devices that operate there.
802.11 networks are one,
cordless phones are another,
video distribution systems,
so if you're beaming satellite something
from your living room to your bedroom,
all those things are going to
interfere with the network.
one too many.
So anyway, so at the card level, again,
we just look for sources
of that interference.
And when we see that going on,
we tighten up some filters inside
to better determine whether
to accept or reject packets.
And that's going to have a little
bit of impact on your performance.
So when that source of noise goes away,
then we go up to a faster speed.
And unfortunately,
in this particular software update,
we can't do that automatically.
We do some things automatically,
but you as administrator or you as
a user will have to control whether
to use this interference robustness.
So if you've gotten the
3.1 software update,
you would notice in the admin utility,
there is a checkbox to turn it on.
And...
In the menu extra of the client software,
there is a menu item that says,
"Use interference robustness."
Looking at some of the bulletin
board discussions over the past week,
there's a lot of confusion
about when to use that,
when not to use that.
Basically, you shouldn't use that unless
you really need to use that.
How do you know when to use that?
We don't know.
You have to tell us.
Generally, if you think that you have
this source of interference,
for sure if you have some kind of,
like I said,
a video distribution system where
you're sending video around your house,
you almost certainly want to
use it in that environment.
But in most other places,
you probably wouldn't.
So it's going to reduce your range.
It's going to reduce your throughput.
So don't turn it on
unless you really need to.
But if you're in a place where
you can't get to a network,
you might as well try to turn
it on and see if that helps.
But just be aware of
what that control is for.
The WDS setup was the
wireless distribution system,
so I mentioned that was a
little bit complicated to
set up in our first release.
Under the covers,
it's really very simple.
It's just that the base stations
have to know the MAC address,
the AirPort ID,
of all the other base stations that
are participating in this network.
So in the first release,
you probably saw,
if you tried to set this up yourself,
that you had to go around
to every base station,
pick it up, turn it over,
find out what its MAC address is,
go into configure one of them,
enter the MAC address, the channel,
the WEP key and everything,
and then go to the other
one and do the same thing,
and make sure that they were
all coordinated so that they
were all on the same channel,
all with the same WEP key.
And we thought, well,
that's kind of silly, because if the base
stations are all there,
if the program can see them all,
if the network can see them all,
then why not just go ahead and
configure them all for you?
So that's kind of what this panel does,
is two things.
One is that if you are connected to...
what is known as the main base station,
which is the base station that's
connected to the internet,
[Transcript missing]
You can tell who the
IT administrators are around here.
So that gives you some
statistics about what clients are
connected to your base station,
and statistics on the
physical interfaces,
how much data is going through,
what kind of error rates are there.
And we'll eventually expose that through
some tool with the admin utility,
but right now it's just
available through SNMP.
And then the
International Character Support.
So this is something new,
and we've been wanting
to do this for a while.
We always had to worry about
some compatibility issues,
but we just decided just to kind
of bite the bullet and go with it.
So 8.2.11 has this notion
of what is a network name,
or what we call an SSID,
which is just the name that
your network is known by.
And in this particular slide,
we're showing Home Network,
which is the U.S.
version of that.
And then we're also showing Home Network,
which I think is the
Korean version of that.
So the radio doesn't care.
The radio just cares that
there's 32 bytes of data that
says what my network name is.
It's just how it gets presented
in these kind of user interface
elements where we have to decide
whether it's how to show it.
In this case,
we're standardizing on UTF-8 everywhere.
Just be aware if you do this that some
PC clients and other clients may not
be able to associate with your network
until they also update to do this.
But that is an option.
And I think finally,
how many people here were at wireless,
were using wireless at
last year's WWDC and using
wireless at WWDC before that,
and wireless at WWDC before that.
And so maybe these guys are the ones
that are setting up these IBSS networks.
So we talked about this for
the past couple of years,
but finally with AirPorT Extreme,
we differentiate now between
an infrastructure network,
so in this case, home network,
which is kind of above the line,
or a computer-computer network,
which is showing home
network below the line.
So in these kind of environments
where there are these mixture of
infrastructure and ad hoc networks,
an AirPorT Extreme user can choose which
one of those they want to associate with.
And so that's a great way to do it.
In some cases, you might want to do that.
But I think before I go on,
just a note about that.
So this is the first day of a big show,
and you probably had some good
experiences and some not good
experiences with the wireless network.
And just be aware that there are
a lot of people working on it,
working behind the scenes
to make all that happen.
At one point this morning,
there were over 1,800
simultaneous users of the network.
So that's putting a big strain
and stress on everything.
And so I think that's
a great way to do it.
And in particular,
Everybody in this room can help.
You can help with a bit
of social engineering,
which is to, first of all,
not do this yourself,
but more importantly,
if you see other people,
ask them not to do this,
which is do not create,
do not turn on internet sharing and
use the same name as the show network.
That helps no one and
hurts almost everyone,
so don't do that.
And likewise,
don't create a computer-to-computer
network with the same
name as a show network.
If you want to do that,
[Transcript missing]
So just be aware, and again,
so this is a couple things here.
One is the international character set.
The other is this differentiation
between infrastructure networks
and computer-to-computer networks.
And this is the interference robustness
menu item that I was talking about.
With that, oh, well, the one more thing.
One more thing is the
Windows admin support.
So we had a Windows admin utility that
worked for the original Snow Bay Station,
and now we've updated the Windows admin
utility for the Extreme Bay Station.
So it's very similar to the
Mac utility in its usage.
And again, just that's up on our website.
It's not on the CD,
but if you go to apple.com/airport,
you will eventually find your way to it.
And the last thing,
since all of you are developers here,
what you're most interested in
is what kind of opportunities
there are for 802.11.
We've talked about APIs off
and on through the years,
and we're starting to
expose some of those APIs.
And we have available now under
NDA if you want to do anything that
adds value to the client support,
like turning power on and off,
looking for wireless networks,
choosing wireless networks,
getting status information.
We have some APIs that
are available for that.
But you have to go through DTS,
so just send a note to DTS at
Apple.com and tell them what
you want to do and why you think
this API would be useful to you,
and we'll see about getting it to you.
And with that,
I want to introduce Phil Kearny,
who's going to talk a little
bit about AirPorT security and
some of the other things we have
planned for the next few months.
Thank you very much.
How's it going?
I seem to be always running up and
down the halls of Apple muttering
all these acronyms and things.
And they said, "Hey,
nobody understands what
you're talking about,
so why don't you explain it to us
and explain it to the developers,
because this stuff is
coming down the pike,
and it'll be good if
everybody knows about it,
because there are some assumptions
that sometimes people make in their
networking applications that you can't
make when people secure the network."
So the first thing I'm going to talk
about is something that is near and dear
to everybody's heart who does IT and
wants to actually secure their network,
and that's 802.1X.
802.1X is an IEEE standard
for Layer 2 network security.
What that means is you can,
in a wireless access point,
and also on a wireless network,
you can do authentication on
that network before the person is
allowed to access network resources.
Basically what 802.1X says is that,
restricting physical access to the
medium is not sufficient for security.
So any of you who have worked in the
DoD or any other government sites
know that they've had 802.1X on
their wired networks for a long time,
and 802.1X has become the basis
for the new security infrastructure
of wireless networks that I'll
talk about in a little bit.
As you can see here,
if you run your Panther CD,
you will find an 802.1X supplicant.
As part of Internet Connect,
one of the tabs that
you'll see is 802.1X,
and you can do your configuration
either for a wireless -- the airport
interface or else for the wired network.
We encourage you to try it out.
We've tried it out
against servers from Funk,
Microsoft, Cisco, and others,
and it works for us,
but we really would like your feedback
on what works and what doesn't work,
so that by the time we ship Panther,
we have a really good 802.1X supplicant
in there that everybody is happy about.
about.
As you can see,
doing 802.1X authentication,
you enter in what port you're doing,
your username, password,
or if you're doing an EAP type,
EAP is the Extensible
Authentication Protocol,
which is used in concert with 802.1X,
for what type of security you're doing.
The supplicant that's in
Panther supports TTLS,
TLS, Leap, Peep, and MD5.
If you don't know what those are
and want to know what they are,
you can go look on the web or come
find me sometime during this week
and bend my ear and I'll explain
them in excruciating detail to
whoever wants to understand each one.
For any of the authentication
types that don't use passwords,
stuff like TLS, there's full support,
keychain support for digital
certificates and stuff in there.
So again,
I wholeheartedly encourage all of
you to try it and send us feedback
and let us know how it works for you.
That leads me into a
thing that we call WPA.
What is WPA?
Well, I call it a strong interoperable
replacement for WEP.
Now, everybody here who's familiar with
wireless should know what WEP is.
WEP stands for Wired Equivalency Privacy.
It's the security,
and I use that term loosely,
that's on your wireless network today.
The problem with WEP is it was originally
used just to secure the radio link
at a time when the only place that
they had wireless networking was on
machine shop floors and things like that,
and people weren't
actually using it for data.
The problems are it uses
64-bit shared keys with only a
24-bit initialization vector.
This means that as you've
read all the horror stories,
the keys are easily recovered.
There's no forge re-protection,
there's no replay protection.
The same key is shared by
everybody using that access point.
So once the key is cracked,
they have access to everybody's
network traffic that's on
that base station or network.
Access Point.
So an industry consortium
called the Wi-Fi Alliance,
or Wi-Fi,
which is where the term Wi-Fi or
wireless fidelity comes from,
they got together and said, okay,
what we want to do is we want to
try and make things more secure.
We need a software firmware fix
for existing devices out there
that's cross-vendor compatible
and operates in the enterprise,
the home, everywhere,
and can solve all these problems.
So they came up with
this thing called WPA,
or Wi-Fi Protected Access.
It's actually a subset of 802.11i.
I know there's every letter
in the alphabet for 802.11,
and it's hard to keep them straight,
but again, if you want to come
talk about all of them,
I'm more than happy to.
The differences with WPA,
improved data encryption,
and it says TKIP there in parentheses,
basically what that means
is instead of a 24-bit,
it uses a 48-bit initialization vector.
Now, 2 to the 48 is a big number.
You know, that's like over 500 trillion.
So it's a really good place to
start when doing your encryption.
It has user-based authentication,
so in enterprise and SOHO situations,
use 802.1X with the AP,
and you authenticate every user before
they get access to the access point,
and people who don't have authentication
can't get on the access point.
It uses TKIP, which is the Temporal
Key Integrity Protocol,
to make per-packet keys.
So unlike the static key that's in WEP,
it's generating new keys all the time.
So every time it feels like,
what's going on?
It's generating new keys all the time.
So every time it feels like,
what's going on?
It's generating new keys all the time.
So every time it feels like,
what's going on?
It's generating new keys all the time.
Well, things might be getting a little
bit insecure here because there's
about 20,000 packets or less.
Maybe we'll change the key.
All this 802.1X stuff
is all radius-based,
so if you have radius servers,
you can hook them up to whatever
directory system you want,
and it'll all just work great.
Testing that I've done with
WPA has been wonderful.
If you have any questions about WPA,
you know, because I know there were a lot
of people who were familiar in
the wireless industry saying,
"Hey, when is Apple going to make
a WPA announcement?" Well,
there you go.
Panther will include WPA support
when it ships by the end of the year,
whenever Panther ships.
Beyond that is 802.11i,
which is the future of wireless security.
WPA, or Wi-Fi Protected Access,
is actually a subset of 802.11 that
they brought the pieces in that
they need for legacy equipment.
802.11i is going to be an IEEE standard,
but it's not likely to
be ratified before 2004.
The folks in Wi-Fi decided they
couldn't wait until 2004 with
everybody yelling and screaming
that their networks were insecure.
So we've taken all the pieces.
For those that didn't know,
Apple is a member of the Wi-Fi Alliance.
We've taken all those pieces that are
there for legacy equipment to make
sure that everybody can have good
interoperable security in the home.
In the home, there's a mode of
WPA called pre-shared key,
which is 400 million times
more secure than WEP.
And for the enterprise,
you can use 802.1x with EAP.
Wi-Fi is currently investigating
a thing called WPA2,
or Wi-Fi Protected Access.
Which replaces the RC4
algorithm with AES.
We don't know if we're going to get
there before 802.11i is ratified,
simply for two reasons.
Currently, with WPA,
we do the best possible fix that
we can to minimize performance
degradation on existing equipment.
And as everybody knows,
AES requires a little
more computing resources.
Unless there is another flaw found
in this implementation of RC4 or
in one of the other pieces of WPA,
like TKIP or MIC,
they're probably not going
to do WPA2 anytime soon.
So, you know, I'm just here to tell you,
don't worry.
We're tracking all the security.
We're tracking all the standards.
We're implementing all
the standards for you.
It's going to be part of Panther.
There are developer opportunities
if you want to put this stuff
into legacy operating systems.
I would encourage you to do so.
There is a big push for people
who have Macs in the enterprise
to be able to support this stuff.
And I think... I think it's a lot of fun.
With that,
I'll turn it back over to Lars Rehder,
and he's going to talk about Bluetooth.
Love my proximity detector.
All right, let's transition out
of wireless Ethernet,
move over to wireless USB,
which is what we refer to as Bluetooth.
Bluetooth, for us,
is really the peripheral
solution of choice.
It's the way to unwire the peripherals
that connect to your computer.
And it does so in a way
that's actually very powerful.
I'll kind of go through some of that.
It's very simple to use.
We've made it very simple to
use for a user to be able to
connect to another device.
There's security built
into Bluetooth as well,
so you can have an encrypted
connection between the two devices,
128-bit encryption.
There's also the concept of pairing.
So as an application developer,
you can decide what is appropriate for
whatever the task is the user is doing.
You can limit what the user can
actually communicate with and
actually force a trusted connection.
You can also have a lot of flexibility
there on the security side.
Bluetooth is also extremely versatile.
You have a core specification,
and around that,
and sort of what fans out from that,
are various profiles.
And essentially,
the profiles sort of map to
different types of devices and
allows you to unwire various types
of peripherals around your computer.
And the connections
are also very reliable.
At the radio level,
you can always make a connection.
It's always very reliable.
There's no real issue
there as far as that goes.
So these all sort of contribute to a very
good user experience around Bluetooth.
Now,
as far as our development is concerned,
you probably remember from last
year when we first introduced
Bluetooth as part of Jaguar,
we introduced profiles
that supported serial,
so basically a serial cable,
virtual cable type of replacement,
object push, dial-up networking,
and synchronization.
And since then,
we've added in two additional profiles,
FTP and HID support as well.
Now, I'm not actually going to go
into those in detail here.
But I would encourage you,
if you're all interested in this,
to join in the session tomorrow
morning where they're going to talk
about Bluetooth in much more detail.
I've got a couple of guys from the
Bluetooth team on the engineering side
who really dive down in a lot of detail.
What I want to focus on instead is
talking a little bit about where
Bluetooth has come and kind of where we
are today and how we're moving forward.
Essentially, if we look at...
If we look at the years
from '98 to about 2002,
those are really the early adopter phase,
or the early years, if you will,
where there were fewer units sold.
Last year, there was 20 million units
shipped out into the markets.
There was a little bit of
momentum there at the very end,
but not a lot of initial movement.
The solutions themselves were mainly
external in nature and some integrated,
the integration coming primarily
on the mobile phone side of things.
From a software perspective,
the connections were pretty basic.
While the connections at the
radio level were pretty reliable,
I think they were still cutting
our teeth on UI in general.
For any of you who've actually played
around with Bluetooth in those years,
you probably remember a lot of fiddling
around and throwing switches and
levers to actually get a phone to talk
to a headset or a handheld to talk
to a phone to get to the Internet,
etc.
Also, in this timeframe,
there was a lot of ups and downs in
terms of where Bluetooth was going.
The original objective was to be
a cable replacement technology,
the premier wireless cable
replacement technology.
That was all fine and good.
Somewhere in there,
there was a bunch of folks that
came on board at the special
interest group level and decided
to move into networking as well,
and thereby causing this confusion
around what is the right thing.
I mean,
is it Bluetooth networking technology
or is it cable replacement?
And that's one of the reasons
why we put up that matrix slide,
which is the first slide I showed you,
to sort of help clarify some of that.
If we fast forward or come to this year,
essentially what we're seeing is
we're seeing some momentum now in
the number of units being shipped.
We're probably not mainstream yet,
but we're getting really close to
sort of crossing that chasm and
getting to the point where we're
going to see Bluetooth in more and
more and more types of devices.
From a hardware perspective,
it's much more integrated now from a
solutions perspective and less external
dongles that are connecting into devices.
The UI, we sort of figured that out now,
I think, generally speaking.
And it's much easier now,
much better integration across
the different devices in terms
of a user being able to engage
and find Bluetooth within
whatever it is they're doing.
And networking, thank God,
is gone as far as Bluetooth is concerned.
It's strictly a cable
replacement technology,
which is what it should be.
Now, if we project forward to next year,
we're in a position to really
dramatically increase the
number of units that are going
to ship out into the market.
We'll most likely see only integrated
solutions and maybe onesies and
twosies in terms of sort of more
externally plug-in type of solutions.
But the main transition I think
we're going to see or we need to see,
this is kind of where you guys all come
into play for any of the application
developers that are out there.
So we need to achieve a level of
transparency in wireless that allows the
user to sort of engage with Bluetooth at
the task level within the application.
So I wanted to sort of talk a little
bit about kind of some of our design
goals and show you some examples of
that from a Bluetooth perspective.
We set out to really
make Bluetooth an easy,
elegant, useful solution for the user.
I think we've done a pretty good job.
What we've done is provided
a Bluetooth menu extra.
So this is something where, you know,
basically stealing a page out of the
AirPort book and providing a one-click
access for the user to the most important
Bluetooth features that they need,
be it on-off, discoverability,
and being able to set up another device.
This makes it much easier for
a user to actually approach
and engage with Bluetooth.
We also added in a setup assistant.
So one of the things that the
Bluetooth Special Interest Group still
is in the process of figuring
out is how to make the overall
pairing experience easier to use.
And that's something that will take
a little bit longer as these sort
of larger bodies take their time
and sort through that kind of stuff.
And in the interim,
what we've provided is a very
easy way for a user to be able
to set up a connection between a
computer and a peripheral device.
Essentially what we've done is we've
broken up this series of steps into
much more sort of digestible pieces
for the user to be able to go through
and work their way through the process.
And it's been tremendously helpful
for them to get started and get going.
The other thing that we've provided,
which is actually also very
useful for the user from a
user experience perspective,
is device filtering.
So if you were to go out
there and search for devices,
say you've got an application where you
want to send a message out and you want
to be able to do it through a phone,
that you can actually filter
by the type of device,
and the user is only exposed to the
things they really need to choose from.
They don't see other types of
devices pop up on the list.
This is particularly useful
at larger conferences.
Granted, this is sort of extreme,
but last week I was at
the Bluetooth Congress,
and you do a discovery there and you come
back with 75 devices if you don't filter,
which is a bit extreme for a user to have
to go through and find the right one.
We've also built
Bluetooth in to the hardware,
starting with the 12
and 17-inch PowerBooks,
which were introduced in January,
and shortly thereafter introduced
models of the iMac and PowerMac,
where you can get Bluetooth as well.
So we're very bullish on Bluetooth as
a technology to really unwire your
desktop or from a travel mobility
perspective to be able to unwire
the cables that you normally have to
take with you when you're traveling.
So now I want to talk or show
you actually some examples of
Bluetooth solutions that are out there
from a synchronization perspective,
messaging, remote control,
and basically turning your
mobile phone into a modem.
And one of the things you'll notice
as we walk through these is sort of
the common denominator across all the
examples is the level of transparency
that exists so that the user is removed
from the complexity of Bluetooth and
is really just thinking about the
tasks that they're working with.
The first one is iSync.
iSync is the application
that we developed last year,
which allows you to take your most
important information with you,
be it calendar or contact information.
It follows you around wherever you go,
across the different types of
devices you would carry with you.
One of the main benefits of this is
being able to send your contacts back and
forth from a computer to a mobile phone.
The transport for that
is primarily Bluetooth.
If you look at this
example of the screen,
as a user, all I really do is worry
about checking the phone,
selecting the phone,
and pushing the sync button.
There's no Bluetooth engagement
beyond that.
We've actually built that into
the setup process so that when you
actually set up the mobile phone,
you can opt to have
synchronization as part of that.
This is the address book.
This is actually a really fun
application from a Bluetooth perspective.
If you haven't used it,
I'd urge you to try it.
It's really great.
It actually allows you to
move forward some of the voice
applications that you'd find in a
mobile phone over to the computer.
I could be working,
and when I have an inbound call,
I could see a caller ID come up.
If I need to send someone a message,
I can do that via SMS,
or I could dial from the address book.
These are all done over Bluetooth.
Again,
the level of Bluetooth complexity here
is limited to the one button that's there
in the upper left-hand corner as far
as the user being able to turn that on.
Beyond that, it's sort of handled.
This is also a great application,
a lot of fun.
It essentially takes your
Sony Ericsson phone and turns it into
a remote control for your computer.
Extremely powerful in that
it's based on Apple scripts,
so you can extend it any
which way you'd like.
It does come with a number of
scripts that allows you to navigate
through iTunes and different
songs and albums and so forth,
as well as DVDs,
or run a presentation from
Keynote or PowerPoint.
But it's sort of, again,
if you look at the UI here,
the user is focused in on what the
remote control function should be,
what the action should be,
and there's really no reference
to Bluetooth in here at all,
which is the way it should be.
Bluetooth should become transparent
to the user and very sort of
seamless in the overall experience.
There's another solution that's
out there called Mobile High Speed.
And this provides sort of,
if there's three elements to the phone,
one is synchronization,
the other is sort of voice-oriented
solutions for voice applications,
the other is data.
And removing the complexity of
being able to get onto a 2.5G
or GPRS network from the user,
so it's a very seamless experience.
This application actually
handles that and provides,
again,
that connection over a Bluetooth link
and makes all those levers and switches
that are sort of required vanish
from the user and they just get on,
which is great.
So what I'd like to do is actually
provide you with some tips if
you're working on or thinking
about Bluetooth solutions.
These are generated
from a low sleep cycle,
high caffeine sort of type of environment
that we're working in for a while.
But I think they're pretty
useful to use as guidelines.
One, the challenge has been is that
for a long period of time,
Bluetooth has been extremely
hard to find for a user.
In fact,
if you go to some type of devices,
you could go five layers deep on
the UI before you even find any kind
of reference to Bluetooth at all.
And having this kind of barrier to
the user just sort of inhibits or
prevents users from actually engaging
with the technology and using it.
So if you're working on a solution,
we really encourage you to
move Bluetooth way higher
up in the UI hierarchy,
if you will, so the user can quickly
get to Bluetooth and at
least be able to turn it on.
One of the other challenges is
that discovery is an easy concept.
People get that,
but it's not always straightforward.
And again,
this goes back to the filtering.
Show the user only the types of
devices that they really need for
the tasks that they're working on
and not a whole list of everything
that's out there in the room.
Pairing is difficult.
I mentioned this before.
There's a lot of
different steps involved.
They need to be done in a sequence.
And again, this is something that the
Bluetooth SIG is looking at
fixing in the longer term.
In the shorter term,
what we really recommend if
you're working on Bluetooth,
unless the data you're sending
absolutely needs to be secure,
avoid pairing.
Rather than doing pairing,
remember where you've been.
Allow connections,
remember that connection,
expose that to the user first so
they can choose off of a cache list,
and then they can get right
back into where they are.
What we found is essentially that most
users will wind up connecting to about
the same six or seven types of devices.
So there's a good chance that if they
go in and you remember that connection,
they'll go right to that same spot again,
and it'll make it a very easy experience.
Now, if you do need to pair
because the data is sensitive,
then go ahead and do that.
But again,
I wouldn't make that a default,
if at all possible.
So the other sort of challenge
for Bluetooth is that there's
limited bandwidth available
over the Bluetooth link.
And you really need to be cognizant
of what you're sending over the air.
And think of Bluetooth as wireless USB.
It's a small pipe.
Don't try to send large amounts
of information over that.
Be very selective of what you do with it.
Otherwise,
the user experience will suffer,
and people will get a bad feeling
about the overall solution.
You don't really want that to happen.
Okay, so on to the last section here.
What I really want to talk
about is where we can,
or start a dialogue on,
is where we can take wireless from here.
I'd be interested to get your reactions
at the end in the Q&A process.
So from a user perspective,
what we're seeing is that users
have more and more wireless
technologies that they're using,
whether it's a mobile
phone or cordless phone,
Bluetooth in a computer or in a handheld,
all different types, whether it's 802.11,
et cetera.
And there's different things
that they can do with that.
For them,
it's harder to keep it all straight.
They're having a difficult time
now to remember which steps are
which for which wireless technology.
Really, what they're after is, again,
a level of abstraction
from the technology.
They want the applications or
the developers in their apps
to take care of that for them,
so it's a very seamless and
transparent experience for them.
Okay.
So what I think needs to happen next is
really we need to get to a stage where
applications take more control over
that experience and provide that level
of transparency so that connections
from a wireless perspective are done,
are sort of task-driven and done at that
level rather than at the system level.
So the user can focus in on
what they're trying to do,
which is to create or
share or collaborate,
and not really worry about,
I've got to connect, I have to associate,
or I need to do some discovery
to be able to get this to work.
The other thing, too,
that I think applications should
start to drive towards is being more
efficient about their bandwidth and
know what kind of connection they're on.
And based off of that,
adjust their features accordingly.
And the example I always
like to use is email.
So if I'm on a pretty wide pipe,
whether it's a wired Ethernet
connection or an A0 to 11 connection,
I can probably bring down my attachments
and all that pretty straightforward,
easily.
It's not really a bad
situation for the user.
But if I try to emulate that
over a narrowband connection,
whether it's a Bluetooth to mobile
phone GPRS type of connection,
you kind of almost want to have the
attachments stay up on the server and the
user to bring those down as they choose.
But this should be something that happens
transparently for the user and not
something they have to remember to go do.
So one of the things I want
to talk about here was really,
or as an example,
is talk about the meeting place
and kind of what it represents
today from a wireless perspective,
and then perhaps some of the things
we could do going forward to really
take it up to the next level.
If we think about the
meeting place today,
it's really about people
coming together where they can,
again, they can share,
they can collaborate,
they can create stuff,
and having come together,
they leave having done something
better at the end of that.
And in that process, typically,
they'll wind up connecting to
different types of equipment or
networks and different devices that
they take with them into the meeting.
So I wanted to show you some
examples of what's available
today that sort of address that.
Today you can actually go into
a meeting and wirelessly present
whatever slides you might have to an
audience using an 802.11 connection.
In this case,
the example is from InFocus.
You can also,
at the end of that presentation,
work on a whiteboard type of
environment and collaborate and
work on next steps and so forth,
and then wirelessly be able to move
that back over to a computer and then
have it distribute via email or whatnot.
E-Beam is working on something like that.
In a meeting room,
you'll typically find a lot of handhelds.
This is something where you could
actually synchronize or send a business
card over a wireless connection.
Even between handhelds,
they can actually communicate and chat.
These are the types of activities
that typically go on in a meeting
with respect to handhelds.
Then there's a mobile phone.
Most users will come
in with a mobile phone.
And here again, with using an application
like AddressBook,
you can filter the calls that come in,
respond via SMS,
and do some of those things as well
as any synchronization that needs to
happen while you're in that meeting.
But if you really step
back and look at that,
these are different kinds of things
that are in that meeting room.
It's really about connecting
my stuff to something.
And I think that the next level of
wireless solutions really come from an
environment where we have achieved sort
of this transparency and application
awareness of what you're connected to.
And to transition that model
so it's not just about my
stuff connecting to something,
but I can connect my stuff to your stuff.
So take that virtual cable
from a Bluetooth connection,
unplug it from my mobile phone,
and maybe I plug it
into your mobile phone,
and we can do something
interesting that way.
But it's a whole other environment,
I think, that's sort of untapped at this
point that really allows and
fosters collaboration using wireless
connections in the various resources
that are available in that room.
So I think this is something really to
think about and sort of drive towards
or work to in your plans as you're
working on your wireless solutions.
So in summary,
what have we learned over the
course of the last hour or so?
Remember the matrix.
So again,
this is probably one of the more
important positioning slides you'll
see from a wireless perspective.
802.11 equals wireless Ethernet.
Bluetooth equals wireless USB.
Mac users love wireless.
We can see that from their early
adoption of 802.11g and from the
market share positions that they hold,
which is much larger than what we
have on the computer side of things.
802.11 has a lot of momentum behind
it from a business perspective,
from a product perspective,
and from a connectivity perspective.
So it's a really good environment
to start working on solutions.
AirPort 3.1 is a great product,
great update to the
AirPort Extreme platform.
Bluetooth is on the rise.
It's getting wings.
There's more and more
products going out there.
It's getting easier and easier to use.
And it's really a great environment
to start some development in
from a peripheral perspective
and following along the lines
of some of those examples I showed
you in the different applications
that are available via Bluetooth.
I think longer-term wireless transparency
is the key to move the whole category
forward for the user and really
generate greater adoption and really
drive it beyond where it is today.
So with that, there's a slide here that
shows the places you can go
to get additional information.
There are three other sessions that
sort of are complementary to this
one that are available throughout the
course of this developers conference.
We encourage you to go
to the one tomorrow.
It is on Bluetooth,
one that I mentioned earlier.
It will be very interesting for
those of you who want to get more
detail into the profiles and such.